---
layout: post
title:  "Welcome to Phil 3751: Political Philosophy!"
---

Dear class,

Happy New Year! I hope you got to enjoy some much-deserved rest over the break and have been taking care of yourselves and loved ones—I’m excited to meet you on our first day of class, Wednesday, January 21! 

My name is Ding (my pronouns are they/them and she/her). Political philosophy was the very first philosophy class I took in college as a freshman; it touched me in ways I didn’t imagine and quickly became the reason I decided to go to grad school in philosophy. I feel lucky to get to introduce you to it ten years later. My hope is that you will have fun, be challenged, build community, engage with the world around you, and learn to think critically *for* yourself. I want this to become one of your favorite courses!

For this class, we will use Columbia’s CourseWorks/Canvas system for assignments/grades/password-protected file sharing, and then a separate, hopefully-easier-to-use [course website](https://pol.dingherself.com) for everything else—syllabus, policies, schedule, handouts, et alia.

Please be sure to review our syllabus and reading schedule before class starts. There are **two short readings assigned for our first class** (check out the schedule to find out what they are!). The syllabus also has information on the anthology I asked Book Culture to order for us, which you’ll need for our Feb 2 class.

Unlike other courses in the humanities, we are not going to read as many pages a week; instead, you may find the readings a lot denser than you are used to. So, take the time you need to read the assigned texts carefully and critically in advance of each class, participate in class discussions actively and regularly, and come to office hours to talk through materials that you find interesting or puzzling.

If you have any questions, please don’t be shy to get in touch! I’m teaching three courses this spring, so I’ll ask students to reach out first to our TA Sara (cc’ed here) for a faster response. I try to get back to students as soon as I can, but sometimes emails do get buried when you have over a hundred students! If you don’t hear back from me for more than a day or two, feel free to send me a quick reminder/follow-up.

Once again, welcome! I hope you will enjoy this class, and I’m looking forward to getting to know every one of you over the course of the semester!

All my best,\
Ding