---
layout: post
title: Plato, <em>Republic</em>; Thrasymachus’ Challenges
module: "The Making of Modern Political Philosophy"
---

## Today

- Wrap up course logistics
- Introduce the *Republic*
- Thrasymachus’ challenges

## The <em>Repubic</em>’s subject matter

Plato (born c. 427 BCE) grew up during the Peloponnesian War (431–404 BCE).

- Male Athenian citizens (not women, slaves, or foreign residents) participated in direct democracy and were assigned offices by lot.
- In the wake of the disastrous Sicilian Expedition, an oligarchical Council of the Four Hundred overthrew democracy in 411 BCE but was soon replaced by a more moderate Five Thousand until democracy was restored in 410 BCE.
- After Athens fell in 404 BCE, Sparta imposed another oligarchy the Thirty Tyrants, whose bloody rule was again overthrown the following year.
- The restored democracy tried and executed Socrates in 399 BCE.

*Dikaiosunē* (adjective: *dikaios*): “Righteousness”; “justice” (common rendering); “morality” (Waterfield trans.). [Sitong]

- A notorious headache for translators.
- While today we follow a long modern tradition of Western political philosophy in thinking of justice primarily in relation to rights, equality, liberty, etc., *dikaiosunē* is first and foremost a virtue of our character (its opposing vice *pleonexia*) akin to courage, wisdom, etc.
- The ancient Greek conception of morality also sweeps broadly to encompass the good life generally—e.g., temperance with respect to bodily pleasures is a moral virtue, whereas its excess (self-indulgence) and deficiency (insensibility) moral vices.
- The ethics–political philosophy border wars.

## The elaborate stage-setting

### Harbor scene

- Socrates and Plato’s brother Glaucon are chilling at a festival down in the Piraeus.
- They get bullied (?) teasingly (?) into having dinner by Polemarchus and his entourage, among whom is Plato’s and Glaucon’s brother Adeimantus.

### Cephalus scene

- At Polemarchus’, they meet his dad Cephalus, his brothers Lysias and Euthydemus, and the sophist Thrasymachus, among others.
- Cephalus is a materialistic business guy. He says he now wants to talk with Socrates more often now that he’s too old to have sex with women, drink, feast, etc.
  - Compliment or jibe?
  - Cephalus does not know, but his whole family is about to be ruined following Athens’ surrender to Sparta; Polemarchus would be executed and Euthydemus exiled.
- Cephalus seems to give us the common sense view (the “folk intuition”) of *dikaiosunē*:
  - Even though he inherited his wealth, he purports to have made it himself.
  - He thinks he’s getting to live peacefully in retirement not so much because he’s rich (he is rich) but because he’s learned temperament.
  - “A good person wouldn’t easily bear old age if he were poor, but a bad one wouldn’t be at peace with himself even if he were wealthy.” (330a)
  - Justice/morality is about telling the truth, not stealing, paying one’s debts, etc.
- Plato’s Socrates uses elenchus/the Socratic method on him: “Everyone would surely agree that if a sane man lends weapons to a friend and then asks for them back when he is out of his mind, the friend shouldn’t return them, and wouldn’t be acting justly if he did.”
  - Socrates wants a *definition* of what justice/morality is, not an unorganized list of *examples* of just/moral actions.
  - The definition has to be *explanatorily prior* to the examples; it must tell a plausible story of why all examples of just/moral actions are just/moral in the first place.
  - Socrates often deliberately misunderstands the view being considered to provoke clarifications.

### Polemarchus scene

- Polemarchus jumps in to defend Cephalus/common sense. He clarifies the view: “He means that friends owe it to their friends to do good for them, never harm.”
- Socrates introduces the skill analogy. [Eduardo]
  - A skill (*technē*) is directed at an *end*; to perform a skill *well* is to achieve its end well.
  - The end of medicine is health; to practice medicine well/to be a good doctor is to treat the sick well.
  - What is the end of being right/just/moral? In other words, what’s being right/just/moral good for?
  - The best answer Polemarchus could come up with is money.
  - But of course there are far better ways to make money.
  - We get a *reductio ad absurdum*: Surely we shouldn’t believe in common sense morality/justice if it implies being moral/justice is useless?
- Polemarchus does not give up, and we go through a few more (fishy) rounds of back and forth, until Polemarchus is backed into a corner. So much for conventions.

## Back and forth with Thrasymachus

Thrasymachus (noted sophist): Silly, justice/morality is “the advantage of the stronger.” [Sophia]
- At least two interpretations of the view come up during the exchange (typical of Plato to portray a sophist as confused and misleading).
- [Stephen Miller’s unironic interpretation](https://youtu.be/eUATziI8hwE?si=0UZ2SrdcNzeuAW1p&t=305): “[Y]ou can talk all you want about international niceties and everything else, but we live in a world, in the real world, Jack, that is governed by strength, that is governed by force, that is governed by power; these are the iron laws of the world that have existed since the beginning of time.”
- A realist “Nietzschean” interpretation: “[M]orality and right are actually good for someone else—they are the advantage of the stronger party, the ruler—and bad for the underling at the receiving end of the orders.”

### Thrasymachus’ first challenge: Does might not make right?

- Socrates introduces two additional assumptions:
  - *Stronger = Ruler*: Whoever is the actual ruler is the stronger.
  - *Fallibility of the Ruler*: Rulers make mistakes and sometimes make laws against their own interests.
- The problem is revealed: On Thrasymachus’ own definition, justice/morality is sometimes the advantage of the weaker.
- Clitophon throws Thrasymachus a rope—“the advantage of the stronger is what the stronger believes to be his advantage.”
  - Clitophon flattens Thrasymachus’ view back to the conventional wisdom that justice/morality is following the law.
- This gets really interesting: Thrasymachus dramatically rejects Clitophon’s revision.
  - *Infallibility of the Stronger*: A stronger who errs is no stronger at all.
  - Thrasymachus then clarifies that he denies Stronger = Ruler.
  - So, even when the ruler makes a law against his own interests, it is still to the advantage of the stronger.
  - This is a very funny view, and he appeals to the skill analogy to defend it: Doctors, accountants, grammarians, etc. who make mistakes are no doctors, accountants, grammarians. (Huh?)
  - But he signs onto the idea that ruling is a skill.
- So, skills again: Toward what advantage is a skill oriented?
  - No skill seeks its own advantage: Medicine is directed at the advantage of patients, not medicine itself.
  - Likewise, ruling is directed at the advantage of the ruled, not ruling itself.
  - Thrasymachus: Silly, medicine is directed at the advantage of doctors, not patients. “You must look at it as follows, my most simple Socrates: A just man always gets less than an unjust one.”

### Thrasymachus’ second challenge: Why should *I* be just/moral?

Socrates gives us three scandalously sketchy arguments:

- The argument from knowledge (349a–350e)
  - Thrasymachus: The unjust person is clever and the just person foolish.
  - An unjust person wants to “outdo” a just one.
  - So a clever person would want to “outdo” an ignorant one.
  - But of course it is the knowledgeable person who wants to “outdo” an ignorant one.
  - Thrasymachus is not allowed a comeback; he instead blushes in humiliation.
  - Why suppose the unjust person is guided by the same end as the just person?
- The argument from strength (351a–352c)
  - Thrasymachus: The unjust person is strong and the just person week.
  - Socrates: Does justice make one weaker or stronger?
    - Injustice leads to hatred and conflict and chaos between persons.
    - Injustice further leads to hatred and conflict and chaos within one person (“a state of civil war”). (Why?)
- The argument from function (352d–354c)
  - The function/work (*ergon*) of a knife is to cut; its virtue/excellence (*aretê*) is what enables it to function well, i.e., sharpness.
  - The function of the soul is living—managing, planning, deliberating, etc.
  - The virtue of the soul is justice.
  - So, justice is what enables the soul to function well.
  - So, justice enables us to live well.
  - So, justice pays.
